and then what happens when you go
looking for a big solution
you never find it right there you are
looking for the magic bullet that's
going to transform your
your mind and then you'll be a
disciplined person and you will be like
one of those people
it'll be a personality transformation so
this is why people stay stuck
so you have to experiment not all big
problems require big solutions
i've noticed that there are a lot of
people in this community who have sort
of these cycles
of like boom and bust when it comes to
motivation
so there's a lot of people myself
included who like you know you'll wake
up one day and something weird will
happen and you'll be like highly
motivated
and then you try to you know you work
really hard and then there's like this
thought in the back of your mind like oh
my god like when is this gonna end i
know it's gonna end and then you're like
motivated for a week and then like
it falls apart and then you're kind of
like you let things kind of
fail and you don't follow up with stuff
and things like that
and then you're kind of like you got a
week or two of like you're in a gray
zone where you're like you know not
really
feeling it and then you feel ashamed of
yourself and all this kind of stuff and
then eventually like you wake up and
your motivation comes back
and then like you know then you you kind
of go back to it so there's almost this
cycle
of success in failure and if we want to
understand the cycle of success and
failure we have to take a slightly
different perspective on emotion
on motivation that i think actually
western science
is sort of missing out a little bit on
and not to say that it you know misses
out on it entirely but if we kind of
look at western perspectives on
motivation
right so for example we have a very
strongly supported model of personality
called the five factor model and the
five factor model has
this attribute called conscientiousness
and what conscientiousness is
essentially like your ability to like
complete tasks over a period of time
so if you look at median income and
worldly success
it's correlated with high
conscientiousness so the people who have
a personality trait
of high conscientiousness or people that
we call
like disciplined right and those are the
people that like are lucky
because their personality is more
oriented towards being conscientious and
disciplined and organized
and they're the ones who can wake up at
7 00 am every day and exercise before
they go to work and
they apply to promotions on time and
they like you know
keep their resumes up to date like
they're very consistent and
conscientious focused
and so so in the west we sort of think
about and we can even see it in our
language
so the way that our science is sort of
structured is to sort of look at
motivation or discipline or
conscientiousness is a trait
right it's an aspect of who you are it's
part of your personality
and while personality can certainly
change over time it's not like a
temporary thing
so the word trait refers to something
that is like kind of a permanent part of
you
and then they're also states so a state
is something that is inherently
fluctuating so for example states of
consciousness
there's like being conscious there's
being asleep there's
an uh like fever is another example of a
state right being sick
is a state it's not a trait it's not a
part of who you are
it's something that fluctuates within
you and when i
hear people talk about motivation
people i've sort of noticed that there's
a bias of talking about it like a trait
right so there's
two types of people there's lazy people
and they're disciplined people there are
unmotivated people
and they're motivated people so this is
sort of like trait like dialogue
and our science sort of supports this
kind of hypothesis or bias right where
we sort of like have five factor
analysis and we sort of like look at
that and we say okay like there is
actually like a conscientiousness trait
to your personality and it's kind of
inborn and it's relatively constant so
it sort of makes sense it's scientific
that you know people are disciplined and
people are lazy
but if you really look at it right if
you look at it very carefully what you
really discover in your own life is that
motivation is actually a temporary thing
by nature your motivation fluctuates
over time right so like just like we
said i mean the whole problem is that
our motivation fluctuates over time
and then we kind of get into a a problem
because you know if we acknowledge that
our motivation fluctuates over time
like that it's essentially a state right
so i'm highly motivated today
i'm not motivated tomorrow then
you know it's kind of tricky because
like if our if our solutions
are sort of trait based if they're
personality based and people sort of
try to figure out how can i become a
disciplined person
that's where our target is what we
really try to do is become
something that we're not so we want to
like flip a switch
that turns on our motivation like almost
permanently right i want to become a
motivated person
and that's what i sort of gear towards
that's what like
success gurus will sort of talk about
right like this is how you become a
motivated person
but it's all very trait-based thinking
it's kind of interesting because
you know in the east they sort of think
about motivation a little bit more like
a state
so this is also you know generalization
but if you look at yogi's for example
what they'll say is like you know the
nature of the mind
is that it fluctuates and that like
motivation will naturally fluctuate over
time
in fact the definition of yoga so
there's a sanskrit
you know line yoga cheetah
which means that yoga is the cessation
of fluctuations of the mind
that is literally the definition of yoga
and so what does that kind of mean like
so how how is it that yoga and
meditation and yogis are like they're
like pretty hardcore right like they
wake up at like
4 a.m every day and they like meditate
and do yoga and they're very careful
about their diet and things like that
and so it's kind of interesting because
like how does that you know
what they kind of focus on is not
becoming disciplined
what they focus on is controlling the
state of their mind
and acknowledge that by definition it's
actually
fluctuating okay so i want you all to
think about something
so let's kind of so what i'd like to
share with you all today is an
understanding of motivation
as a state instead of a trait so i want
you to think about something so if i
play video games every day let's say i
wake up every day and i spend all my all
my time watching twitch and video games
and youtube and netflix and whatnot okay
so when i look at that when i look at
myself i say to myself
i am unmotivated and that is why
i spend all my time playing video games
and netflix and whatever right
so i want you all to think about this
for a second is it because you are
unmotivated that you spend all your time
we waste your time right they say oh if
i was more motivated i wouldn't
like if i was motivated i would go out
and like get a job or exercise or
whatever if i was motivated
so you know if i was motivated then i
would spend all my time doing this stuff
but i want you guys to think what's the
chicken and what's the egg is the lack
of motivation what causes you to play
video games all day
or is it playing video video games all
day that causes the lack of motivation
and so there's a really simple
experiment for this right so like you
think about you know your motivational
level
let's say like you want to work on your
resume when you wake up first thing in
the morning on a scale of one to ten how
much do you
want to work on your resume let's call
it a four okay let's say like you're not
even work on it
but if you measure your motivational
level it's like a four out of ten
and then like after you play like an
hour of a game
what happens to your motivation are you
like more motivated or less motivated
to work on your resume and then like
after six hours of the game
and eight hours of a game like if you
pla been playing league for 10 hours
how motivated are you to
work on things right and so it's
interesting because
most people are saying less some people
are saying more so we'll get to that in
a second some people are saying the same
but i'm not saying that you know even
without doing the behavior
your motivation towards the behavior
will fluctuate i know it's kind of
interesting right but if you really pay
attention to yourself
we're not saying that if you say the
same because you're not doing it that's
not actually correct
your motivation actually fluctuates
which is a really fascinating discovery
because
then what we sort of realize is that
like playing video games
induces low motivation which is a really
shocking discovery because
that doesn't mean that you're lazy or
disciplined right it's not a trait
it's that the things that you do will
actively contribute or not contribute to
your motivation
so essentially what the yogis sort of
discovered is a system where
i would kind of think about it this way
there's certain actions so i want you to
think about motivation not as like a
personality characteristic
or like a stat on your character sheet
it's not like they're disciplined people
and undisciplined people
i want you to think about motivation as
a bank balance and there's some actions
that you take
which will contribute to the balance and
then when you want to do something
you will actually like pull from the
balance right i'm going to make deposits
and i'm going to make withdrawals
so if i i know it sounds kind of weird
going to the gym
requires a withdrawal right
but being at the gym actually makes a
deposit
which is interesting so now we begin to
see like how disciplined people are
able to do it because every time they go
to the gym they make a withdrawal but
they also make a deposit
and y'all you know it's kind of like
really fascinating because if you
notice yourselves and you know the cycle
of motivation what essentially happens
is like
you do something right and then you feel
motivated and like okay i clean my room
good
now i'm gonna do this and now i'm gonna
do this and now i'm gonna do this and
now i'm gonna do this
and if we spend all of our time playing
video games like what's happening to our
motivation like we're making withdrawals
from it right like if i'm
i'm decreasing my motivational capital
when i
waste my days and so it's kind of
interesting because then if we look at
the cycle of motivation inevitably what
we find
is as people become more motivated and
they start doing more stuff
they start engaging in actions which
require withdrawals but they're not
making the appropriate deposits i know
it sounds kind of weird
but if i start like you know if i clean
my room that requires an energy
investment and gives me a burst of
energy
and then eventually what i'll end up
doing is i'll take on like bigger tasks
more difficult tasks like more
challenging tasks
that actually withdraw more of my
motivational energy than i'm able to
deposit
so a good example of this is like
tackling finding a job
right because like that task is so big
that you don't really get the reward
until the end but there are all of these
steps involved which
you may actually be making motivational
withdrawals for
and then you kind of like run out of
motivation and i know it sounds like
really really weird but
if you look at people who who go into
cycles of success and failure
what they essentially do is like they
start off lighting the candle
and then they like light a firecracker
and then like they light like you know
they just like burn all their motivation
away and then it's like
a set of fireworks and then they feel
completely spent afterward
and what what i really find is that if
you really want to sustain your
motivation
you have to continually make deposits so
we see this in addictions too okay so
addictions is a
fantastic example of this where you know
someone is like
yeah like i'm i'm one week sober hell
yeah like how did you get one weeks over
i went to three meetings a week
and then they're like i'm sober it's
great i feel awesome i'm gonna start
doing this i'm gonna start doing this
because i'm sober now i'm sober now
and eventually what happens is like oh
like what about going to meetings
i don't need to go to meetings anymore
like i'm sober i don't need meetings
i've done it i'm three months sober so
they stopped going to meetings
right and at first they were like super
careful and they like went to their
first barbecue where people were
drinking and they were going to meetings
at the time they're like oh i can handle
this now.
so they stop going to meetings and they
continue going to barbecues
and then eventually what happens they
continue going to barbecues and then
they relapse
it's like how did that relapse happen i
thought you had it under control like i
thought
you had solved it and they're like yeah
now i am
sober it becomes a trait in their mind
instead of a state
it's no longer something that i have to
work towards i have it on luck
i am sober now i am disciplined i don't
need to worry about maintaining
discipline
because i am disciplined and so
essentially what we discover
is that there are contributing factors
to our motivation
which is it's a state right so you've
got these motivational bucks
and it's going to fluctuate over time
and instead of chasing
after becoming a disciplined person all
you really need to do is like keep on
making motivational deposits
in the case of sobriety what it means is
like you go to meetings
even if you're sober you keep going to
meetings
because i see this all the time you know
in mental health treatment especially
is that people love abandoning the
treatment that works
like if i put someone on an
antidepressant medication and six months
later they're no longer depressed
they come into my office and they're
like yeah i want to stop the medication
why because i'm not depressed anymore
it's a reasonable like request right but
like
let's understand how you got
there and so if you're experiencing
cycles
of success and failure what i really
want y'all to pay attention to
is what are what is like the state of
motivation
that what led to your state of
so like really think a little bit about
you know when people say like okay like
i shouldn't play video games i need to
stop playing video games entirely
whereas recognize that each hour of the
day that you play video games it
actually makes like a motivational
withdrawal
so and this is really dangerous thinking
because if i play like
let's say valorent for 10 hours a day or
dota for 10 hours a day
and i think to myself if i play for
eight hours a day
what difference does it make eight or
ten what's the difference i'm not gonna
you know i'm not gonna put together my
life if i'm playing dodo for eight hours
a day
who the hell cares about ten hours a day
like eight or ten what difference does
it have to degenerate either either way
and those are the people that don't
acknowledge that playing dota for two
less hours a day
is actually going to boost your
motivation by a small amount
so i want y'all to really focus on the
state of motivation
and you can also kind of understand this
with with
food as well right so like you can think
about
when you eat like how much do you feel
like studying how much do you feel like
working and like depending on what food
you put into your body
how does that affect your motivation if
i'm like you know if it noon rolls
around and i eat like six slices of
pepperoni pizza like what's gonna happen
to my motivation afterward
what happens to my motivation when i
drink coffee what happens to my
motivation when i take adderall
so we begin to see that once again and
this is why yogis have a very specific
diet because they sort of discovered
something called the satwik diet
you know what the satwik diet
essentially does is like enhances the
state of your mind
so that you're like highly motivated and
so it's kind of tricky because like
you know we think about discipline and
laziness but what we really don't think
about is like what is the cost of eating
six slices of pizza
it's not just calories and you're like
i'm a degenerate i don't care about
calories like whatever
like i'm overweight whatever or you're
not overweight maybe you've got avata
metabolism and you're totally fine
but what we don't really think about is
each action that you take
is going to be making a motivational
deposit or a motivational withdrawal
and what i encourage you all to do is to
really think about the state of
motivation
and think about how does my motivation
get altered and how do i need to
nurture it because it's not a trait
right it's not like a house that i build
and then stays up there
motivation needs to be cultivated like a
garden now i can water it every day and
it'll grow
and it'll be great but if i stop
watering it the garden's gonna die
so most people that i work with who have
cycles of success or failure
essentially once they start harvesting
fruit or vegetables or herbs or whatever
from the garden
they stop taking care of it which
inevitably leads to the failure
so start to think a little bit more
about motivation as a state and start to
think a little bit about how your diet
how your actions how your the company
that you keep how your environment
sort of gives you motivational deposits
and be really careful if you start to
withdraw a ton without
continuing to maintain whatever brought
you the motivation in the first place
how do i get enough protein with a
scotic diet it's tough but remember that
the saatvik diet you can eat tofu
and you can eat lentils right so those
are the two major sources of protein
but if you're going to be a bodybuilder
and you're trying to eat one
you know one gram of protein per kg i
think is what it is
you know that's really hard to do on the
scottish diet remember that scottish
people are not bodybuilders
what about discipline so here's what i'd
say about discipline
discipline is what a high state of
motivation
looks like from the outside so if you if
you actually look on
inside the mind of a disciplined person
they're not
disciplined like it's not very different
from your mind it's just i i know it
sounds kind of weird but
discipline is like what we see from the
outside it's an emergent property it's
not actually a thing
yeah so can you provide some practical
examples of depositing and withdrawing
stuff from your motivational bank
absolutely so like i've done i have
right so like playing a video game what
does that do to your motivational bank
decreases it or you're not making a
deposit right
so like if you think about doing a small
task like cleaning cleaning is going to
be a motivational deposit
and a motivational cost but generally
speaking it's going to be an
upswing so if we think about cleaning
this is the way i'd think about cleaning
so cleaning requires
withdraws five motivational points but
gives you a plus two
for the next week every single day
right so what we tend to see is that
people who are highly disciplined like
will do multiple things
going to the gym is a minus 10 but is a
plus four
for the next week eating a healthy meal
maybe like a minus two but will be a
plus one
for the like a plus three for the next
three days
right so this is how i want you guys to
think about your motivational bank
he's like what is the small task every
time i play a video game like if i play
one day of dota
that's a minus two for the next 72 hours
right and then eventually we get to like
dopamine detox realm where if you play
that
so much then it's like a pretty bad like
minus
30 or minus 50 percent to all
motivational deposits
it's a 50 tax on every deposit that you
make
so this is why if you look at people who
like you know put their lives together
they do so
not by transforming themselves
right and even like this is the problem
is if you look at like people who become
successful and i fall into this
camp right i say oh i went to india and
i found myself and then i became
successful
and it seems like a magical like
overnight thing
but i went to india at the age of 21 and
i started medical school at the age of
28.
there's seven years in there of like
little
successes and little failures that sort
of build up over time
so it took me seven years to get on the
path to success
let alone another like eight
to actually like become qualified to be
a decent human being
is a scottish diet gonna be vegan no so
sativic diets will include dairy
actually unless you take do you unless
you do like the east asian version of a
sophic diet
which may be dairy free those will
probably be vegan like if you eat at you
know a monastery in korea like that'll
probably be vegan
how does one overcome more difficult
obstacles to gain motivation
is it just do it no so this is my whole
point
so the way that you become overcome a
difficult obstacle is by making
tiny tiny deposits that are going to
build up your motivational bank
right so how do you overcome depression
like i've seen a bunch of these posts
recently where people like i cleaned my
kitchen today
does that overcome depression no is it a
step forward
absolutely so you clean your kitchen one
day you do your laundry day two
you like clean the living room day three
and you go through your mail
day four
you look at your syllabus day five and
each of those days
is going to give you like a motivation
buff that's like stacking
and then what happens is people stack it
stack and stack it and then they get to
the point they're like
oh look at all this motivation i have
now comes the cycle of success and
failure
because you've you've stacked up a buff
of plus 28 motivation
per day that starts decaying over time
and then you stop doing the things to
take care of yourself
and then it all disappears right so i
want you all to stop thinking about
discipline
or saying like oh i took a five-factor
personality test and
my conscientiousness is low i'm screwed
like that's scientifically that's true
and you can still overcome it right by
using motivation
buffs which is the eastern style so
if people want one really really simple
concrete
thing to do to make a motivational
deposit
one day a week okay like if you have
medical concerns or something like that
like make sure you talk to your doctor
but i'd say one day a week
do a fast that includes fruits nuts and
dairy and that's it
one day a week and water obviously so
like drink as much water as you want to
but
you know you can still get a decent
number of calories so we're not saying
like starve yourself but like reduce
what kind of macronutrients you take in
fruits nuts and dairy that's it yeah so
if you've got like diabetes and stuff
you know don't do this kind of thing but
how does this help it's going to give
you a motivational buff of like plus
three for the next few days
that's how it's gonna help no veggies
just give it a shot so i'm not saying
you should do it for a prolonged period
of time you try it for a day and see if
you like it
so a lot of people i encourage all of
you all to experiment with your diet
right try to figure out okay what are
the foods that make me feel more
motivated
what are the foods that make me feel
less motivated start to make adjustments
i think a good place to start is like
you know you'll get
some amount of protein some amount of
fat and some amount of carbohydrate
it's a relatively safe thing to do and
if it feels really bad or you start to
get concerned or whatever like if you
start to feel super weird like
just eat normally and you should be fine
or go see a doctor
maybe ask your doctor before you do it's
probably good advice and so i want y'all
to all pay attention to what's happening
right now
so in your life motivation is a big
problem
therefore it requires a big solution so
the other problem with cycles of
motivation and failure is that like
think see how your mind resists the
solution it's like oh that can't be
enough
because the problem feels so big to me
that it must have a big solution
and then what happens when you go
looking for a big solution
you never find it right there you are
looking for the magic bullet that's
going to transform your
your mind and then you'll be a
disciplined person and you will be like
one of those people
it'll be a personality transformation
this is why people stay stuck
so you have to experiment not all big
problems require big solutions like
someone has been addicted to alcohol for
15 years
how do i get sober it's such a huge
problem you go to meetings
you go see a therapist that's it it's
like four hours a week
three hours a week two hours a week
maybe even one hour a week
it's really interesting so be careful
when your mind
tells you that a solution is too simple
or too easy
for your hard and complex problem
and what you really listen i i encourage
you to think about it in your own life
right like when you've
realized something you're like oh crap
it's so simple i just didn't realize it
right so big solutions don't necessarily
require big problems
i mean uh big problems don't necessarily
require big solutions
is vitamin d deficiency messing with
motivation too absolutely
so there's uh you know one of the tests
that i always run
not always but usually run for patients
of mine who are depressed is vitamin d
so vitamin d deficiency contribute is
one of the
causes for depression and so we also
know that
you know supplementing vitamin d or
getting someone's vitamin d level back
to normal can be a treatment for
depression
so this is where in the east they sort
of say that there's seven
things that result in health and one of
them is sunlight
and that sunlight is like important to
be healthy
what are the others okay so let me see
if i can remember
sunlight food water air sleep
exercise and meditation
these are the seven things that you
should do to take care of yourself
you